README.MD, before:

[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%20License%202.0-blue.svg?style=flat)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

# Web-types

Welcome to web-types, the JSON standard to document web component libraries.

Web-types is a framework-agnostic standard to provide IDEs and other tools with metadata information about contents 
of a web components library. It also provides extensions for a framework specific content.

You can check out features supported by IDEs [here](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/wiki/Features-supported-by-IDEs).

# Upcoming version 2.0 of the standard

For last couple of months we have been working very hard to create a version of web-types, which 
would work seamlessly for any kind of web framework, or even for libraries, which modify HTML
in a custom way.

The preview of [new web-types schema](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/blob/master/v2-preview/web-types.json)
is available in `v2-preview` folder. There is also [an example web-types file](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/blob/master/v2-preview/vue@3.0.0.web-types.json), 
which describes support for Vue framework in detail.

You can preview the new support in WebStorm (and other JetBrains IDEs) through [Early Access Program](https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm/nextversion/) of 2020.2 version.
To enable your web-types file in the project, link it through `web-types` property of your local `package.json` file.
You can specify multiple web-types files by providing an array of paths. Please mind, that the new version
of the schema has not yet been released to SchemaStore, so you need to manually specify it through `$schema` property
in your web-types JSON. You can use following URL:

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JetBrains/web-types/master/v2-preview/web-types.json

**Support is still in preview mode and schema may change**. The goal of preview phase is to gather 
feedback from the community and improve the format. Therefore, please do not bundle any web-types (in the new format) 
with your libraries yet.

The new version of web-types provides legacy support for Vue-only web-types.

# Distribution

Library providers are welcome to include detailed web-types JSONs and link them through `web-types`
property in `package.json`. E.g.:
```
{
  ...
  "web-types": "./web-types.json"
  ...
}
```
Currently following libraries are providing this feature:
 * Vue.js
   * vuetify (https://github.com/vuetifyjs/vuetify/pull/9440)
   * quasar (https://github.com/quasarframework/quasar/pull/4749)
   * bootstrap-vue (https://github.com/bootstrap-vue/bootstrap-vue/pull/4110)
   * nuxt.js (https://github.com/nuxt/nuxt.js/pull/7611)
   * @ionic/vue (https://github.com/ionic-team/ionic-framework/pull/22428)

For the most popular libraries basic information is published under `@web-types` scope on NPM. 
Currently following frameworks and libraries are supported in such a way:
 * Vue.js
    * bootstrap-vue 
    * quasar
    * quasar-framework
    * vuetify
    * nuxt.js

Published JSONs are checked into repository under `packages` folder. In case of web-types published to `@web-types` scope,  IDEs are supposed to download required JSONs without any changes to user project structure.

Various IDEs perform optimizations when scanning `node_modules` directory, so to ensure that `web-types` for 
your package are always available, make sure it's listed in `packages/registry.json`.

# Schema

Web-types schema is available in `schema` folder. Use one of the following URLs to reference it in your JSON files:
```
http://json.schemastore.org/web-types
```
or
```
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JetBrains/web-types/master/schema/web-types.json
```


# Generating web-types

### From source

Currently, following component documentation formats are supported:
- JSDoc using [styleguidist](https://vue-styleguidist.github.io/docs/Documenting.html#code-comments) `vue-docgen-api`
  library - add [`vue-docgen-web-types`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vue-docgen-web-types) package to your project 
  and run `vue-docgen-web-types` command. You can launch it in a watch mode by passing `--watch` and 
  you can pass a custom configuration file via `--config` parameter. 
  See [config.d.ts](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/blob/master/gen/vue-docgen-web-types/types/config.d.ts)
  for detailed information on supported configuration file options.
  
If you're not using JSDoc in your project, you can create your own builder for `web-types` JSON. For examples see
vuetify, quasar or bootstrap-vue pull requests from above.

### From published NPM packages for inclusion in @web-types namespace
To extract metadata information from NPM published library you can use `scripts/extract.sh` bash script. 
So far only vue.js framework extraction is supported. The usage syntax for the script is following:

```
extract.sh vue <package-name> <sem-version-range> [--production,--discard-same]
```
Example usage:
```
extract.sh vue vuetify ">=1.0.0" --production --discard-same
```
The script will output "#Error:..." strings into JSON in case of syntax it doesn't understand
while performing static analysis. This allows to improve script to handle specific syntax used
by a library. However, while publishing metadata we don't want to include errors, so one can
use `--production` parameter to exclude errors from the output. 

Some versions of libraries contain exactly the same information and with `--discard-same` parameter
we can minimize amount of generated JSONS and produce only those, which are unique.

# Local development with web-types

You can use web-types in your local project or library. Just link a generated web-types file in your `package.json` and IDE will pick up global components from it.

# Publishing to `@web-types` scope

To publish a package to `@web-types` you need to have permission. Automated publishing is done with
`script/publish.sh` script, which usage syntax is following:
```
publish.sh <package-name> [--dry-run]
```
The script will scan folder `packages/<package-name>` for generated web-types jsons and synchronize
contents with NPM. 

# Versioning and naming of `@web-types` scope
Versioning and naming rules are as follows:
* web-types for package `pkg-name` are available under `@web-types/pkg-name`
* web-types for package `@scope/pkg-name` are available under `@web-types/at-scope-pkg-name`
* web-types for version `1.2.3` are published as prerelease `1.2.3-n`, e.g. `1.2.3-3`
* web-types for pre-release version `1.2.3-rc.1` are published with additional segment, 
  e.g. `1.2.3-rc.1.3`
* to search for appropriate web-types package use range `<pkg-ver` and include prerelease versions, 
  e.g. to find web-types for version `1.2.6`, query package list with `<1.2.6`, which can match 
  web-types in version `1.2.4-12` 
* all outdated versions are marked as deprecated and should be ignored by an IDE

# Contributions

All contributions are welcome! We need your help to improve the web-types standard specification,
to support other frameworks and to improve quality of generated metadata through scripts.

Commit message:

Update schema and README.MD

README.MD, after:

[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%20License%202.0-blue.svg?style=flat)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

# Web-types

Welcome to web-types, the JSON standard to document web component libraries.

Web-types is a framework-agnostic standard to provide IDEs and other tools with metadata information about contents 
of a web components library. It also provides extensions for a framework specific content.

You can check out features supported by IDEs [here](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/wiki/Features-supported-by-IDEs).

# Upcoming version 2.0 of the standard

For over a year we have been working very hard to create a version of web-types, which 
would work seamlessly for any kind of web framework, or even for libraries, which modify HTML
in a custom way.

The preview of [new web-types schema](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/blob/master/v2-preview/web-types.json)
is available in `v2-preview` folder together with examples to show how Vue or Angular is supported. 

Experimental support is present in WebStorm (and other JetBrains IDEs) since version 2021.2. In 2021.3 the support
will be in *stable* condition with a lot of bugfixes and improvements like support for CSS classes and properties coming in.

To enable your web-types file in the project, link it through `web-types` property of your local `package.json` file.
You can specify multiple web-types files by providing an array of paths. Please mind, that the new version
of the schema has not yet been released to SchemaStore, so you need to manually specify it through `$schema` property
in your web-types JSON. You can use following URL:

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JetBrains/web-types/master/v2-preview/web-types.json

The new version of web-types provides legacy support for Vue-only web-types.

Documentation on version 2.0 is coming soon.

# Distribution

Library providers are welcome to include detailed web-types JSONs and link them through `web-types`
property in `package.json`. E.g.:
```
{
  ...
  "web-types": "./web-types.json"
  ...
}
```
Currently following libraries are providing this feature:
 * Vue.js
   * vuetify (https://github.com/vuetifyjs/vuetify/pull/9440)
   * quasar (https://github.com/quasarframework/quasar/pull/4749)
   * bootstrap-vue (https://github.com/bootstrap-vue/bootstrap-vue/pull/4110)
   * nuxt.js (https://github.com/nuxt/nuxt.js/pull/7611)
   * @ionic/vue (https://github.com/ionic-team/ionic-framework/pull/22428)

For the most popular libraries basic information is published under `@web-types` scope on NPM. 
Currently following frameworks and libraries are supported in such a way:
 * Vue.js
    * bootstrap-vue 
    * quasar
    * quasar-framework
    * vuetify
    * nuxt.js

Published JSONs are checked into repository under `packages` folder. In case of web-types published to `@web-types` scope,  IDEs are supposed to download required JSONs without any changes to user project structure.

Various IDEs perform optimizations when scanning `node_modules` directory, so to ensure that `web-types` for 
your package are always available, make sure it's listed in `packages/registry.json`.

# Schema

Web-types schema is available in `schema` folder. Use one of the following URLs to reference it in your JSON files:
```
http://json.schemastore.org/web-types
```
or
```
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JetBrains/web-types/master/schema/web-types.json
```


# Generating web-types

### From source

Currently, following component documentation formats are supported:
- JSDoc using [styleguidist](https://vue-styleguidist.github.io/docs/Documenting.html#code-comments) `vue-docgen-api`
  library - add [`vue-docgen-web-types`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vue-docgen-web-types) package to your project 
  and run `vue-docgen-web-types` command. You can launch it in a watch mode by passing `--watch` and 
  you can pass a custom configuration file via `--config` parameter. 
  See [config.d.ts](https://github.com/JetBrains/web-types/blob/master/gen/vue-docgen-web-types/types/config.d.ts)
  for detailed information on supported configuration file options.
  
If you're not using JSDoc in your project, you can create your own builder for `web-types` JSON. For examples see
vuetify, quasar or bootstrap-vue pull requests from above.

### From published NPM packages for inclusion in @web-types namespace
To extract metadata information from NPM published library you can use `scripts/extract.sh` bash script. 
So far only vue.js framework extraction is supported. The usage syntax for the script is following:

```
extract.sh vue <package-name> <sem-version-range> [--production,--discard-same]
```
Example usage:
```
extract.sh vue vuetify ">=1.0.0" --production --discard-same
```
The script will output "#Error:..." strings into JSON in case of syntax it doesn't understand
while performing static analysis. This allows to improve script to handle specific syntax used
by a library. However, while publishing metadata we don't want to include errors, so one can
use `--production` parameter to exclude errors from the output. 

Some versions of libraries contain exactly the same information and with `--discard-same` parameter
we can minimize amount of generated JSONS and produce only those, which are unique.

# Local development with web-types

You can use web-types in your local project or library. Just link a generated web-types file in your `package.json` and IDE will pick up global components from it.

# Publishing to `@web-types` scope

To publish a package to `@web-types` you need to have permission. Automated publishing is done with
`script/publish.sh` script, which usage syntax is following:
```
publish.sh <package-name> [--dry-run]
```
The script will scan folder `packages/<package-name>` for generated web-types jsons and synchronize
contents with NPM. 

# Versioning and naming of `@web-types` scope
Versioning and naming rules are as follows:
* web-types for package `pkg-name` are available under `@web-types/pkg-name`
* web-types for package `@scope/pkg-name` are available under `@web-types/at-scope-pkg-name`
* web-types for version `1.2.3` are published as prerelease `1.2.3-n`, e.g. `1.2.3-3`
* web-types for pre-release version `1.2.3-rc.1` are published with additional segment, 
  e.g. `1.2.3-rc.1.3`
* to search for appropriate web-types package use range `<pkg-ver` and include prerelease versions, 
  e.g. to find web-types for version `1.2.6`, query package list with `<1.2.6`, which can match 
  web-types in version `1.2.4-12` 
* all outdated versions are marked as deprecated and should be ignored by an IDE

# Contributions

All contributions are welcome! We need your help to improve the web-types standard specification,
to support other frameworks and to improve quality of generated metadata through scripts.
